---
title: About The Sabato Morais Digitization Project
layout: page
permalink: /about-sabato-morais-digitization-project.html
# Edit the markdown on in this file to describe your collection
---

Our third [Jesselson-Kaplan American Genizah Project](https://morais.exhibits.library.upenn.edu/jesselson-kaplan-american-genizah-project), The Sabato Morais Digitization Project, provides digital access to the writings and correspondence of Sabato Morais.  His personal papers and publications, in turn, point researchers to primary sources that document the development of observant Jewish life in the broad context of Victorian culture on both sides of the Atlantic during the nineteenth century. (More about Morais can be found here.) This project is of interest to scholars of American, Italian and Sephardic Jewish history, religious studies, immigration and ethnic studies, Hebrew language and the history of Biblical interpretation, and the history of scholarship. By making these writings and correspondence of Sabato Morais digitally available, researchers have access to primary sources that document the development of observant Jewish life in the broad context of Victorian culture on both sides of the Atlantic during the nineteenth century.

## The Sabato Morais Papers
The record for the Sabato Morais Papers at Penn Libraries can be found [here](https://franklin.library.upenn.edu/catalog/FRANKLIN_9924409013503681), and the finding aid [here](http://hdl.library.upenn.edu/1017/d/ead/upenn_cajs_ARCMS8USUSUSPUCJS). The Morais Papers can be divided roughly in half primarily between correspondence and writings. The earliest materials in the collection date from 1845 and the latest from just before Morais' death in November of 1897. The bulk of the collection is concentrated from after the time when Morais came to the United States in 1851 through 1897, and especially after 1876. The collection contains valuable information on Jewish life in Philadelphia in the second half of the nineteenth century, and provides new insight into Morais' role in the development of the Historical school of nineteenth century Judaism in American (precursor of American Judaism's modern Conservative movement) and the founding of its central institution: the Jewish Theological Seminary, in New York. Morais also maintained a life-long correspondence with family members, friends, and teachers from Italy, whose letters (in Italian) are rich in number and variety.

Several personal items, such as a copy of Morais' will as well as his certificate of membership in the Order of Free Masons, from Italy, are found in the collection. In addition, Morais' ordination discourse written in his own hand as well as his (rabbinical) ordination certificate from Italy are also held; the original ordination certificate, written on parchment and signed by Rabbis Piperno, Curiat and Alveranga, explicitly describes Morais as ordained, employing the language of "semikhah" (ordination).

The collection also contains numerous manuscripts and drafts of Morais' various sermons and lectures. As noted above, Morais was an outspoken supporter of a wide variety of causes such as abolition, (Native American) Indian rights, the protection of the Chinese working in the United States, protection of children and animals, supporter of the improvement of the status of women. Morais also received numerous appeals to help indigent Jewish communities, especially from Palestine.

The first phase of the Sabato Morais Digitization Project resulted in the digitization and TEI encoding of the first two series (Correspondence and Literary Productions) of the Sabato Morais Papers. Its second phase includes building a searchable database that performs full-text searching of almost every document in the Sabato Morais Papers and displays the images of retrieved documents alongside their encoded transcription. 

## Related Projects

### The Sabato Morais Ledger
This project is available at [http://sceti.library.upenn.edu/morais/](http://sceti.library.upenn.edu/morais/). 
Sometime during the early 1950s, Marvin Weiner, a Philadelphia area business man and collector of early Americana, was browsing "Sam Kleinman's Schuykill Book Shop," a "junk store," as he called it, then located at the corner of Lancaster and Belmont in West Philadelphia. Weiner found there a ledger-sized volume filled with clippings by Sabato Morais. Realizing its significance, Weiner purchased the scrapbook and thus saved one of the most remarkable documentary treasures of American Jewish history.

Since discovering the Scrapbook in the early 1950s, Weiner carved out enough free time over the subsequent four decades to catalogue assiduously on to index cards the items in the ledger. He did this while attending to his professional and family commitments and philanthropic service on the boards of a number of Philadelphia cultural institutions. On each index card, Weiner identified the work pasted in the ledger and provided a transcription of Morais' handwritten annotations. He also compared the Ledger's contents with Prof. Moshe Davis' published, annotated bibliography of Morais’ writings.  Weiner systematically noted each item Davis had not listed. To supplement the catalogue of the contents of the ledger and to provide better access to it, Weiner created a register of the newspapers represented in the ledger. The register consisted of an alphabetically arranged list of each newspaper title and the date of each issue from which an article had been clipped.

Mr. Weiner later joined the board of the Dropsie College of Hebrew and Cognate Learning. Dropsie College, founded in Philadelphia in 1907, was the first institution in the world to be accredited to confer PhDs in Jewish Studies. With the rise of Jewish Studies within the setting of the American University system, Dropsie College, an independent institution, began a steady decline. Marvin Weiner joined the board at a critical time in its history. The College's endowment was depleted, its support from the organized Jewish community waning, its physical surrounding in a state of disrepair, and its library the victim of a number of thefts and losses (such as the Morais Scrapbook!), Mr. Weiner assumed the chairmanship of the Library committee and devoted himself to the cause of restoring the library. To this end, he purchased or donated a number of important works, including the missing first volume of the Bomberg rabbinic Bible printed in Venice between 1521 and 1524, for which he successfully bid at an auction in New York City.

In 1992, Weiner donated the Morais Ledger to the Annenberg Research Institute, a post-graduate think-tank for the comparative study of the monotheistic religious traditions, and the successor institution to Dropsie College. In the course of a grant project to organizes the Institute's archives, including Sabato Morais' personal papers, it came to Weiner's attention that the scrapbook originally formed part of the Morais collection at Dropsie. Shortly thereafter, Weiner donated the Ledger on the condition that it forever be maintained as part of the Sabato Morais Collection.

In 1997, Mr. Weiner commissioned Dr. Leslie DeLauter, then working at the University of Pennsylvania Rare Book and Manuscript Library, to type his index card catalogue into a computer. A tally was soon made and it was discovered that of the 771 articles Weiner catalogued, 595 did not appear in Davis' bibliography. Not every article found there was unknown, however. Many of the articles constituted the original printing of Morais' publications in the non-Jewish press, which later were re-printed and circulated in the Jewish press from which Davis mainly based his compilation. The great difference in number also reflected the fact that Davis grouped serialized publications under one item number, whereas Mr.Weiner itemized every article, including serialized publications, individually. Still, the scope of Morais' output is remarkable if only because it has been unknown to scholars of American Jewish history until recently.

The typing of the catalogue was the first step towards its publication. The final steps of editing, proof-reading and formatting the Catalogue were undertaken by Ms. Gina Glasman, a doctoral student at Columbia University, and Ms. Etty Lassman, a Research Assistant for the Fellowship program at the Center for Advanced Judaic Studies at the University of Pennsylvnia. Ms. Glasman served as editor of the project and undertook to compare the catalogue with the contents of the Ledger, establish a uniform entry format, and created a name and subject index. Ms Lassman completed the project, overseeing the proof-reading and layout for the final product. Both worked tirelessly and diligently to help realize the dream of Moshe Davis and to ensure for posterity the story and priceless contributions of Marvin Weiner.